# BITCOIN
<sub>21.okt</sub>

Bitcoin, made by Satoshi Nakamoto 2009 (anonymous), came as a result of the desire for a monetary system with no central authority. There is a total of 21 million Bitcoins, where 18 million already are generated. We have three roles, the people, the authorities and the miners (also approve trasactions). 


### Easy crypto: Hash functions, 

$h: A -> B$  

$h$ is easy to compute

A is infinite, B is finite

$h^{-1}$ is hard to compute

$x, h(x)$ it is hard to find $y$: $h(y) = h(x) $

Hash a big document and get a small number which is a fingerprint. MD5, Sha-(1/128/256)

### Public key crypto

One public key and one private key which can unlock. Certification authorities used to sign publick keys. Blockchain is a solution to the consensus problem. 

The owner of the bitcoin is the __public key__. A bitcoin is used like a check. The __owner A__ of a check can give this check to a person. You write the new __owner B__ and the __Signature A__. Then you have a new bitcoin with the publick key __owner B__. 

In theory it is possible to sign a bitcoin and give it to multiple people. This is called double-spending. This is a problem in electronic cash, which can be avoided by common knowledge of approved and unapproved transactions. This must be done without central authority, and becomes a consensus problem.

## The consensus problem

You want to give someone money. You give your transaction __T__ to a node in the system. A copy of the blockchain/storage is kept on every node. When exchanging, a block of transactions (with some other data) is made. The result we are after is that everyone agrees on the same block, that there is _consensus_. The next block will start with the hash of the previous block, which links the two blocks, ergo _blockchain_. This is important for avoiding double-spending, where people check if they can receieve money by reading the previous blocks.


__Who decides which the next block is?__

We can not use Paxos for solving the consensus problem since it is not built for byzantine failures. Also Paxos broadcasts messages, which is heavy on the miners since there are millions. 2PC does not tolerate byantine behaviour, and it does not tolerate failure (if a node fails, it waits indefinitedly), so it also is not appropriate here. 

In a block we have the following:
 - Hash of previous block
 - Transactions
 - Nonce
   - Any number is fine, where the goal is to find the nonce so other miners accept the block.
 - Hash
   - This hash has the last __k__ bits set to zero because the protocol works this way. If a hash does not have this property the other miners do not accept it.

Doing all the previously mentioned components results in a succesful block, which is not easy. You have to recalculate the hash many times (billions) to fullfill the requirement of __k__ zero bits. __k__ is set in such a way that it is not easy to find the hash, and it changes over time. The __k__ is set in such a way that the time to generate a new block is 10 minutes. 


Getting the right block results in a bitcoin reward. This reward has been halving throughout the years, and went from 50 to 6.25 in 2020. If two miners find the right block, we have a fork. There are two correct ways to extend the blockchain. If each block reaches part of the miners, you have a situation where both branches are correct until a new block is foudn in one branch, meaning the other becomes a bad branch which the miners stop working on the block there. This is why there is a rule of thumb of waiting for 6 more blocks in the blockchain to be totally sure that you are in a safe branch. This is why finding new blocks is hard, because it needs to be so there can't be a lot of branches. 


Every miner extends the longest chain, which means shorter branches are bad branchse and not accepted. Althought the transactions happening in bad branches will later be accepted in the long chain so transactions don't disappear.

The protocol is __not safe__ because it is possible you have a fork which lasts forever if you are very __very__ unlucky. There is __no liveness__ either because you can have a fork which lasts forever. A randomized consensus protocol is live and safe, with high probability, but not always. The disadvantages, is the heavy requirements for computational resources where people use many GPUs or FPGAs to hash blocks.

The problem is that if one controls 50% of the miners, one can control the blockchain. With a pool of miners, you can split the space you work on and try to get the right nonce, in which case you split the money. How do you check if someone is actually doing the work? Well, if __A__ finds the nonce with __k__ (which must be the lists signifcant base) zeros in the hash. __B__ says ok I have a nonce with k-1, and __C__ says I have a nonce with k-8 zeros, and the money is split according to the amount of work done.

K is measured by the amount of work done on the 

When you want to buy bitcoin, you go to the market. The market keeps your wallet. An example of a (scandalous) market is MtGox which was one of the more famous markets before it closed in 2013 because someone stole all the bitcoins. It is speculated that the owner, the databse of all transactions. The problem of anonymity problem is that you are anonymous as long s the money is in the wallet. But if you know who is linked to a wallet everyone can see all your transactions and you lose anonymity, especially if you send money from your wallet to your bank account.

Anothe famous market is SilkRoad, made by a guy who thought it is a cool idea to buy drugs in the dark web. A short novel about the ["The untold story of silk road"](https://www.wired.com/2015/04/silk-road-1/). Some other markets are Binance, Crytopia, Coinbase. 

There have also been cases of scams, one of the more famous ones being the _Pump&Dump_ scam. The most famous case of _Pump&Dump_ happened in the 1920' in Wall Street. A group of people, the radio pool, made small purchases and coordinated to raise the price and attract new stock buyers. Then when a high price was reached, they sell all their stocks and crash the stock, enriching themselves in the process.

ZeroCash is an example of Zero-Knowledge coin, which guarantess full anonymity. Argo uses PDFT, which is much more energy-efficient and fast.

Smart contracts in the blockchain can be executed to do stuff and move money.
